WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Good evening
on this Independence Day.
I'm William Brangham.
Judy Woodruff is off.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: North
Korea claims it successfully
tested a long-range missile
capable of reaching the U.S.
What options remain for
the Trump administration?
Then: relocating the bushmen
-- after being forced out of
their homeland, the struggle
for the few remaining
hunter-gatherers in Botswana
to preserve their culture.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Officially,
nobody is allowed to return.
Over the years, some have
tried to recreate life in the
villages, but they say it's just
not the same.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And what's
the buzz on a new beer?
How a lab discovered a
new type of yeast from
bees that's changing the
game for beer makers.
ROB DUNN, North Carolina
State University: We actually
think, based on some work from
colleagues in Italy, that it's
very likely that those first
beers and breads were relying
on yeasts from insects, too.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It
was North Korea's own
version of fireworks
for the Fourth of July.
The communist state today fired
off a new missile that may
someday put the United States
within range of its weapons.
Nick Schifrin
begins our coverage.
NICK SCHIFRIN: On this July
4, North Korea declared
independence from what it called
American nuclear threats.
WOMAN (through translator):
The scientists and technicians
have successfully test-fired
the newly developed
intercontinental
ballistic missile.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In Pyongyang,
North Koreans celebrated what
appears to be its most advanced
test in its long pursuit
of a nuclear weapon.
The missile flew for about 40
minutes, almost straight up,
reaching an altitude of more
than 1,500 miles, and came
straight down 580 miles
away in the Sea of Japan.
On a flatter trajectory, it's
estimated the missile could
have traveled as far as 4,000
miles, past Anchorage, Alaska,
says scientist David Wright.
DAVID WRIGHT, Co-Director
of Global Security,
Union Of Concerned
Scientists: If they shoot
it essentially straight up in
the air, it goes very, very
high and comes down not very
far away.
If they then flatten it out a
little bit, it uses all that
speed to go a much longer
distance.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But the test
doesn't mean North Korea can
deliver a nuclear weapon.
It's not known whether
it's mastered required
miniaturization or
guidance and separation
systems that can take
years to develop.
DAVID WRIGHT: As you go to
longer and longer ranges, there
are just much higher stresses,
vibrations, the acceleration,
so there are a lot of forces
on this nuclear warhead.
We don't know if they have
actually done the final steps to
have a warhead that they could
actually put into one of these
long-range missiles and have
it work the way it's supposed
to.
NICK SCHIFRIN: As
president-elect, Donald
Trump vowed not to
let today's event ever
happen.
As president, he tried to push
China to pressure North Korea,
but he recently admitted that
failed.
Today, he addressed North Korean
leader Kim Jong-un, tweeting:
"Does this guy have anything
better to do with his life?
Perhaps China will put a heavy
move on North Korea and end
this nonsense once and for all."
But, today, China didn't
show willingness to
apply more pressure.
GENG SHUANG, Chinese Foreign
Ministry Spokesperson
(through translator):
We hope all sides can
remain calm and exercise
restraint, ease the tense
situation on the peninsula.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And, in Moscow,
Chinese and Russian Presidents
Xi Jinping and Vladimir
Putin jointly called for the
U.S. and North Korea to abandon
long-held positions in order
to calm the peninsula.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
We agreed to actively promote
parallel freezing of
nuclear missile activities
of North Korea and
large-scale joint military
drills of the U.S.
and South Korea.
NICK SCHIFRIN: North Korea has
exploited the July 4 holiday
before, in 2006 and 2009.
But this is their most
dramatic test, and their
momentum is increasing.
They have now launched more
missiles in the last three years
than in the last three decades.
DAVID WRIGHT: I don't see a
roadblock to them being able
to continue this process until
they got a missile that
really had the ability to
reach the lower 48 states.
I think it's just a
matter of time until
they reach that point.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Nick Schifrin.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We will look
at the implications of the North
Korean test right after the news
summary.
In the day's other news: Iraqi
soldiers in Western Mosul
advanced deeper into the last
pocket still being held
by Islamic State forces.
Fierce fighting continued in
an area packed with civilians.
But in Baghdad this evening,
Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi
proclaimed a big victory over
ISIS, or Da'esh in Arabic.
HAIDER AL-ABADI, Iraqi Prime
Minister (through translator):
All the displaced must return
to their homes.
We are continuing to liberate
all our land from Da'esh.
The Iraqi people ended the
myth of Da'esh in record time,
although the world thought
that this wasn't possible.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Meanwhile,
in Syria, a Kurdish-led
militia has breached
the heart of the Islamic
State's self-proclaimed
capital, Raqqa.
The U.S.-backed forces today
punched through the wall around
the Old City and are now pushing
into the most heavily fortified
portion of the ISIS stronghold.
President Trump's first
face-to-face meeting
with Russian President
Vladimir Putin will
happen this Friday.
They will meet on the sidelines
of the G20 summit as it
begins in Hamburg, Germany.
The White House says
there will be no specific
agenda for the meeting.
There's word that Canada will
apologize to a Canadian citizen
for the alleged treatment
he received at the
Guantanamo Naval Base.
It's widely reported
that he will also be
paid nearly $8 million.
Omar Khadr was captured
in Afghanistan when
he just 15 years old.
He initially admitted to
killing a U.S. soldier and
spent 10 years at Guantanamo.
Khadr says his confession was
coerced, and Canada's Supreme
Court has now ruled he was
interrogated under what it
called oppressive circumstances.
In New Jersey, the three-day
government shutdown is over.
Democratic lawmakers reached
a budget deal last night,
and Republican Governor Chris
Christie signed it into law.
Christie had been heavily
criticized for using a
state beach on Sunday,
after it was closed
to the public.
The new budget agreement allowed
state parks and beaches to
reopen for everyone just in
time for the Fourth of July.
MAN: Pretty excited.
We're going to see the Statue
of Liberty, so we're pretty
excited to be back here.
And I saw on the news yesterday
that it was closed for budget
issues, so it's pretty cool.
WOMAN: It's my first time.
MAN: Our first time.
WOMAN: Well, it's amazing
that it opened in time.
But it's very thankful,
and it's a very special
day to reopen Liberty Park.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In Maine,
Governor Paul LePage also
signed a new budget, ending a
partial government
shutdown in his state.
And in Illinois, there was
no break in a budget impasse
that's now in its third year.
Republican Governor Bruce
Rauner vetoed a $36 billion
package, along with a major tax
hike.
The Democratic-controlled
state Senate quickly
overrode the veto.
But the House took
no immediate action.
And the nation marked its
241st birthday today with an
array of annual celebrations.
Fourth of July parades began
with one in Gatlinburg,
Tennessee, at midnight.
That's been their
tradition for 42 years.
And in Washington this evening,
President and Mrs. Trump
hosted a White House picnic
for military families
before the annual fireworks
over the National Mall.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what options does the U.S. have
after North Korea's missile
test?; a court orders the EPA
to put an Obama era rule into
effect; farmers struggling with
a drop in crop
prices; and much more.
We return now to North Korea
and its recent missile launch.
Today, the United States called
for a closed-door United Nations
Security Council meeting to
address the threat.
So, what exactly are the Trump
administration's options,
and how might it respond?
For that, we turn to
Ambassador Christopher Hill.
He was the chief U.S. negotiator
with North Korea from 2005
until 2009, and served as
U.S. ambassador to South Korea.
And by Mark Bowden.
He's a national correspondent
for "The Atlantic"
magazine, and he recently
wrote a comprehensive
cover story titled "Can
North Korea Be Stopped?"
Gentlemen, welcome to you both.
Ambassador Hill, I would
like to start with you first.
Can you just give me
your initial reaction to
this most recent launch?
CHRISTOPHER HILL, Former U.S.
Ambassador to Iraq: I think
it's a very serious matter.
It's pretty clear they have made
progress on intercontinental
ballistic missiles.
From what I can understand,
if you sent it at a different
pitch, it could actually exceed
the 5,000 miles that qualifies
it as an intercontinental
ballistic missile.
So it's a pretty serious matter.
And we also understand they made
progress on miniaturization,
so it's not farfetched
to assume that in the next two
or three years, they will have
a deliverable nuclear weapon
aimed at the United States.
And the real question is, how is
the president going to explain
that to the American people?
And, perhaps more immediately,
what is he going to do about it?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Mark
Bowden, just as Ambassador
Hill is saying, President
Trump has said he
will not allow a nuclear-armed
missile to be able to be
developed in North Korea.
But this certainly
seems like a very large
step in that direction.
MARK BOWDEN, "The
Atlantic": It does.
And in addition to shrinking
a nuclear weapon to go on top
of a missile like that, they
already have chemical and
biological weapons that are
capable of mass casualties.
So, this is a really
serious development.
And it's easy to say you're
going to stop them from doing
it, but it's not a very easy
thing to accomplish.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Ambassador,
I wonder if you could give
me a sense of, what is your
understanding of what Kim
Jong-un actually wants
with this nuclear program?
CHRISTOPHER HILL: Well, you
know, opinions differ on this.
There are some who believe this
is a poor, beleaguered country
surrounded by larger hostile
states who want to do it harm,
and so why not allow the North
Koreans to defend themselves?
But I think it's actually
a much more aggressive
purpose they have in mind.
I think what they're hoping is
that to hold American civilians
at risk, that is, to have
a deliverable nuclear weapon
that is deliverable to the U.S.
mainland, they can convince the
United States not to exercise
their responsibilities in
the treaty with South Korea.
And I think being North Korean
is to believe that, somehow,
if they can get the U.S. out
of the equation, they
could reunite the peninsula
on their own terms.
This is -- seems farfetched,
but to be a North Korean is not
necessarily to believe in the
conventional wisdom.
I think there are a lot of North
Koreans who feel there is a lot
of pro-North Korean sentiment
in South Korea, and if only
they could get the U.S. out
of the equation, they could do
it.
So I think it's is a very
serious moment and, frankly,
a very dangerous moment.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Mark Bowden,
what do you make of that?
Is this really primarily a
development of an offensive
weapon for the potential keeping
the U.S. and others at bay
while it retakes South Korea?
MARK BOWDEN: I do think -- and
I agree with Ambassador Hill
that is the primary reason
for having this weapon, but it
also gives North Korea a lot
more leverage in that region
and certainly in dealing
with South Korea.
It's conceivable, given the
overtures that the new South
Korean president has made to
reopen negotiations with North
Korea, that he could -- Kim
Jong-un could use the possession
of a weapon like this to
pressure that those negotiations
take place without the United
States.
And I think his goal may well
be to get the United States
to withdraw from the Korean
Peninsula.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Ambassador
Hill, help me understand this
a little bit more, though,
because we are always told
that, while this regime may be
a despotic regime, that they're
not out of their minds,
they're not irrational actors.
And the idea that somehow
the U.S. would allow them
to invade South Korea
just seems unbelievably
farfetched.
CHRISTOPHER HILL: Well, I
mean, if you look at the kind
of weaponry, which tends to be
very offensive, tends
to be right up there
in the front, when you
look at, as Mark pointed
out, their capacities in
chemical weapons and biological
weapons, if you look at the
fact that they have some
14,000 artillery tubes right
up there in the front pointing
right at the South Korean
civilian populations,
it looks to be a kind
of offensively minded
force.
And I think, for a long time,
they have been dedicated to
the proposition that they have
to kind of decouple the U.S.
from the Korean Peninsula and
then a lot of things will fall
their way.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Mark Bowden,
your piece in "The Atlantic"
laid out what you describe
as the four main options for the
Trump administration to respond.
And you imply obviously that
these are largely bad options.
Can you sort of explain
what suite of options that
the administration has?
MARK BOWDEN: Well, the obvious
one, people Always bring this
up whenever I'm interviewed
on the subject, is that,
well, why don't we just attack
North Korea and take out their
military and
eliminate the threat?
And that's certainly doable, but
the consequences of that would
be horrific, as the ambassador
just pointed out.
Even the conventional weapons
that North Korea has could level
Seoul, a city of 26 million
people.
And when you add, you know,
chemical weapons and biological
weapons and potentially nuclear
weapons, you have possibly
one of the greatest
catastrophes in human history.
The other possibility is to
sort of turn up the screws, a
series of small-scale military
attacks that would kind of ramp
up the pressure on North Korea,
something that could rapidly
descend into an
all-out conflict.
Another possibility is to target
Kim Jong-un himself and try
and eliminate him and replace
him.
And then the last bad option
is just to accept the fact that
we can't stop North Korea from
building these weapons.
And, you know, deterrents
are -- you know, in
this case, it would just
be assured destruction
- - we can hope might
prevent them from using them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Ambassador,
last question to you.
The president seemed to imply
in his tweet that it's really
upon China to handle this
situation.
But we have had now three
administrations that have tried
to persuade China to act with
regards to North Korea.
Why hasn't that happened yet?
CHRISTOPHER HILL: Well, I
think the Chinese are split.
I think there's some Chinese
who feel that the demise of
North Korea would be perceived
in their country -- that is,
in China -- as a victory for
America and a defeat for China.
And they worry about the
perception of that within China,
that is, it's a domestic issue
within China.
So, there are a lot of people
who want to go with reforms
much faster than Xi Jinping
does.
And if North Korea were to
go away, perhaps those people
would be in the ascendancy.
So, a lot of party
types, security types in
China don't like to see
something that results
in something that looks
like a U.S. victory.
That said, I think those
three administrations
are absolutely correct.
We need to work more with China.
I think the problem is President
Trump has more of an outsourcing
notion, that, somehow,
OK, over to you, China,
you sort this out.
We will support you, and, by
the way, we will stop calling
you a currency manipulator and
all the other bad things
that you don't like.
Well, China is not going to
be able to do this alone.
I would keep the door open
for negotiation, not that the
North Koreans have shown any
interest in negotiation.
But having done it for a number
of years, I think it was the
right way to keep our relations
with Japan and South
Korea together, and having
taken a lot of criticism
from people who thought,
how can you think negotiation
is the right answer?
It has to be a factor in it
if you're going to keep others
together with you on the issue.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All
right, Former Ambassador
Christopher Hill, Mark
Bowden of "The Atlantic"
magazine, thank
you both very much.
MARK BOWDEN: You're welcome.
CHRISTOPHER HILL: Thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Next: a
legal setback for the Trump
administration and its effort to
reverse environmental
regulations from the
Obama presidency.
Yesterday, an appeals court
ruled that the Environmental
Protection Agency cannot delay
implementation of a rule
limiting methane emissions
from new oil and gas wells.
The court said the EPA can
rewrite the rule, but it can't
take the shortcut of suspending
enforcement.
Juliet Eilperin is a reporter
for The Washington Post, and
she's been covering this story.
Welcome back to the "NewsHour."
JULIET EILPERIN, The
Washington Post: Of course.
Thanks.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Tell me, what
did the court, in essence, rule?
JULIET EILPERIN: What the
court said is that it wouldn't
necessarily stand in the way if
the new administration wanted
to rewrite an existing rule
on the oil and gas industry,
but the administration
couldn't simply suspend
compliance with this rule.
It had to go through a
laborious public comment
process if it wanted to do that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, this rule
is about methane, which, as you
have reported and many others,
that methane is a particularly
potent greenhouse gas.
I think it's 25 times
more potent with regards
to warming than CO2 is.
What did this prior, this Obama
administration rule actually do?
JULIET EILPERIN: It imposed
new restrictions on oil and gas
wells that are either new or
modified, that if the oil
and gas industry was going to
create a new well or modify an
existing one, it had to
have tighter restrictions
to lower the releases
of this greenhouse gas
as kind of a way that
the administration was
looking to reduce these
emissions across the
oil and gas industry over time
to slow down climate change.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: EPA
Administrator Pruitt and many
in the industry argue that these
rules -- to enact these
rules was too expensive,
that they also overlap
with state rules that
govern methane.
And the EPA also argued that
this -- their move wasn't
subject to judicial oversight,
which I take it the judges
were not that happy to read.
JULIET EILPERIN: Yes, on a 2-1
ruling -- and it's worth noting
that the majority were two
Democratic appointees, the
dissenter was appointed
by a Republican --
said that, essentially,
by doing this, by suspending
the rule, it's essentially
revoking it altogether, and that
is subject to judicial rule.
They also took aim with the
argument that the Environmental
Protection Agency and the
American Petroleum Institute
were making that industry didn't
have sufficient input into
the rule.
And the argument was, we can
point out all these ways in
which you had to comment and
that the rule addressed
your concerns, maybe
not to your liking, but
they did tackle those
questions back when they
issued this rule in 2016.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This move by
the EPA was just one of many,
many attempts by Scott Pruitt
and the EPA to push back
on Obama era regulations
that they don't like.
Does what the court ruled in
this particular case, in your
mind, have any bearing on those
other attempts that they're
making in other realms
to roll back regulations?
JULIET EILPERIN: This ruling
appears to have implications,
not only for Scott Pruitt and
the EPA, but whether
you're talking about
the Interior Department,
the Labor Department,
other agencies.
These are always where
there's an effort under way to
revoke these Obama era rules.
And what the court said is,
at least for now, your task is
harder than you thought it was.
You can't just freeze them in
place, and you're going to face
serious obstacles in your way,
because there will be folks
on the outside challenging it.
And we think they have merit
and that you need to take a
different course if you're
going to revisit
some of these rules.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: With
regards to other environmental
regulations, most notably,
the president recently
backed out of the Paris
climate accord, or said that
the U.S. would back out of it.
And I know that Scott Pruitt
was among many arguing for that.
There was a big debate
within the administration,
as you have reported.
Does this give you a sense that,
barring today's - - barring
yesterday's ruling, rather, that
Scott Pruitt has really become
one of the more influential
Cabinet members, in as far
as his ability to do the things
that the president wants done?
JULIET EILPERIN: Absolutely.
I think that folks who are a
fan of what Scott Pruitt are
doing and those who oppose him
would say that he's clearly
emerged as one of the most
effective Cabinet members.
We have seen him already take
action on a slew of policies.
It's nearly 30 rules that --
or major decisions that he
has reversed in some ways.
And so what we're seeing,
is even though he only has a
handful of appointees in place
at this point, he has managed
to manipulate the leaders of
power quite effectively in
a way that certainly it is
taking some of his counterparts
in other departments longer
to master.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Juliet Eilperin of The
Washington Post, thanks so much.
JULIET EILPERIN:
Thank you, William.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
bushmen of the Kalahari Desert
fighting for their ancestral
lands; a new way to make beer
that's all the buzz; turning
national parks into classrooms;
and uncovering a creature
that roamed the Earth
13,000 years ago.
But first: It is growing
season for farmers across the
Midwest, and many are faced with
yet another tough financial
forecast, as corn and soybean
prices remain low, which means
less money in farmers' pockets.
In Nebraska, some producers are
now coming to grips with what
some say is this new reality.
From NET in Nebraska,
Jack Williams reports.
CARL SOUCEK, Farmer: This
is our little office that we
use as kind of a break room.
This is the center where we
can on the computer or order
parts or things like that.
JACK WILLIAMS: On a family
farm in Prague, Nebraska, about
40 miles north of Lincoln,
Carl Soucek is right at home.
His family has been farming
this land since the late 1940s.
They grow mostly corn and
soybeans, but the last couple
of years haven't been easy.
High prices for crops translated
to more income for farmers a
few years ago, but now those
prices have tumbled, leaving
farmers in a financial ditch.
CARL SOUCEK: The best thing
that ever happened to the corn
industry was $7 corn, and the
worst thing to happen to it
was $7 corn, because it kind of
threw everything out of balance.
And I think we will see
the cycle come back.
I don't know when it's
going to come back.
JACK WILLIAMS: While he waits,
Soucek is doing what he can
to cut costs on the farm.
Instead of taking his equipment
to the local implement dealer
for repairs, he has parts
delivered to the farm and
does those repairs himself.
How much money does that save
you, doing your own repairs?
If you had to take your tractor
in yourself, how much would
that cost you, compared to
you actually doing
this yourself?
CARL SOUCEK: Shop rates
can run anywhere from
$75 to $150 an hour.
And service calls, if they
come out from the dealership to
work on a piece of equipment,
service calls could be
another $250 on top of that.
So, if it's something we can
take care of ourselves, every
time we do that, we're saving
a little bit of money.
JACK WILLIAMS: Soucek doesn't
apologize for enjoying the
good times a few years ago.
He says farming isn't always
easy, and when prices of crops
such as corn and soybeans
shot up, many farmers' earnings
increased, and they enjoyed
a higher standard of living.
It was a lot different than
the days when they had to
watch every penny they spent.
CARL SOUCEK: If we need to
go back to that, we will.
And I think we have already.
We're careful about our family
living, and been there, done
that, and we will do it again
if we need to tighten
our belt that much.
JACK WILLIAMS: At a recent
economic workshop in Lincoln,
farmers and ranchers got a dose
of economic reality.
With falling prices of corn,
soybeans and wheat bringing
farmers less income, many are
facing more debt, tighter
margins and an uncertain future.
They're looking for guidance
as they try to navigate through
the down times without too
much damage.
JAY PARSONS, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln: They have seen
the good times, they have seen
the bad times.
They know nothing lasts forever.
And they keep track of things
and they monitor things and
they're aware of things.
But there's probably a decent
number of people out there that
haven't had that perspective
and are still trying to
adjust to the new situation.
JACK WILLIAMS: Economic factors,
such as high land costs and
skyrocketing property taxes,
are testing the resolve
of some Midwest producers.
But that might actually
be a good thing for their
long-term financial health.
TINA BARRETT, Director, Nebraska
Farm Business, Inc.: Tough
times make better managers.
And if I think about the
producers I work with, those
who had tough times in the '80s
are great managers today,
because they had to learn how
to make those tough choices,
they had to learn how to manage
their business like a business,
and they continued to do
that through the profitable
times and made a lot
of money through that.
JACK WILLIAMS: Dave Nielsen
is a third-generation
farmer in Lancaster County
in Eastern Nebraska,
where he grows corn and
soybeans on about 2,000 acres.
His father and grandfather
worked this ground before him,
so he's seen the good and bad
times.
He says the younger farmers
who got into the business a
few years ago when prices were
high are the ones who feel
the downturn the most.
DAVE NIELSEN, Farmer:
It was really tough on
young guys starting then.
Young guys starting in those
glory years, wow, this is easy.
There was a lot of youth that
came back to the farm, maybe
left jobs in town and came
back to the family
farm, to the farm.
And, you know, now it's a
whole different ball game.
Now it's, you really
have to watch what you're
spending on inputs and
family living and that.
JACK WILLIAMS: Nielsen probably
won't lime his soil this
year and, like Carl Soucek in
Prague, he's doing a lot of
his own repairs to save money.
And he's taking a hard look
at the rest of his expenses.
DAVE NIELSEN: Every
good operation should,
even in the good times.
Really, you should.
You probably -- just a little
sharper pen or a little
sharper pencil when you're in
the downturn.
JACK WILLIAMS: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Jack Williams
in Lincoln, Nebraska.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Now we
travel to Botswana in Southern
Africa to meet a tribe who are
fighting their government
to retain the right to live
on their ancestral lands.
They were forced off in
part because their lands
are rich with diamonds.
Special correspondent Martin
Seemungal has our story.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Their clothes
are modern, but their tools
of the hunt are thousands
of years old.
The San bushmen still use the
spear and the bow and arrow.
Botswana's enormous Central
Kalahari Game Reserve is their
home, and one of the last
places on the planet where
you can find bushmen who still
hunt and gather to survive.
The San have been tracking
like this for generations.
Technically, it's illegal,
because the government
has banned hunting inside
the Central Kalahari
Game Reserve, but some
of them do it anyway.
They say it's very
difficult to stop because
it defines who they are.
Tolme Etata's first memories
are of hunting this land.
"If we stop hunting, our culture
would be affected," he says.
"Hunting and gathering
is part of us."
Though it is part of them,
it is not part of the plan
for the Central Kalahari Game
Reserve, as Botswana's
government sees it.
The San bushmen's way of life
and culture are under threat.
Their struggle to remain here,
in a place originally set
aside for them in the 1960s,
goes back to a major discovery
in the 1980s: diamonds.
By the mid-1990s, the hunt for
precious stones in vast open pit
mines like this meant eviction
from the reserve for
the hunter-gatherers.
Mohulude Moete says it was done
by soldiers and military police.
He says: "We were given
instructions: If you
don't get into the
truck, we will shoot you.
Some of our water containers
were emptied into the ground.
We had no options, so we had to
go along with them or be shot."
These women were young
when the authorities came
for them, but say the
memories are unforgettable.
MUDIKOLELO LEMTODI,
Removed Person: All the
houses were destroyed.
Houses that they used
their energies to
built were destroyed.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL:
Wells were sealed up.
In spite of that, small
numbers refused to leave.
But there were more evictions,
another big one in 2002.
The government denied any
connection between the evictions
and diamonds in the Central
Kalahari Game Reserve.
It said the bushmen were
being moved out to protect
the wildlife in the reserve.
Botswana's president at
the time was Festus Mogae.
QUESTION: Will you let the
bushmen go home, Mr. Mogae?
FESTUS MOGAE, President of
Botswana: Where is home?
Home is in Botswana.
(CROSSTALK)
QUESTION: In the CKGR.
Will you let them go home?
FESTUS MOGAE: No, no.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The semi-arid
Kalahari Desert is a harsh
place, but it's livable, if you
know where to gather,
along with the hunt.
Whether its roots buried deep
in the sandy soil or wild
melons worth a day's water, all
of their sparse
world is put to work.
Traditional huts comes
from the desert brush.
Onjustice Xothelo says two
days' work will last a decade.
The roof is a type
of grassy thatch.
ONJUSTICE XOTHELO, San Bushman:
The thatching grass on top
won't allow even water to get
in.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: But the
government wanted fewer bushmen
staying in, and the evictions
from this land continued
for nearly 10 years.
Bushmen were relocated
to new settlements.
This one is called New
Xade, named for the village
they were forced to leave.
New Xade is just 50 miles from
the Kalahari, but it might
as well be 5,000 miles away.
Officially, nobody
is allowed to return.
Over the years, some have
tried to recreate life in the
villages, but they say it's just
not the same.
You can find those traditional
huts among the small
government-built houses.
"Building the structures here
is a reminder to us that we
had these huts in Kalahari,"
he says.
"But our ancestors aren't here.
We build them to
remind us what we had."
New Xade has good roads, a
modern clinic and a school.
But beyond government-related
jobs, there is little else.
MAN: I'm looking
for a job, a job.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Right.
There's nothing to do here?
MAN: Yes, we have nothing
to do, so, dying for
hunger, looking for job.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: There is a
small mountain of beer cans
outside the one building that
does do big business:
the local bar.
Alcohol abuse is rampant,
leading some to criticize the
government for creating these
relocated towns.
Survival International, an
agency that works to protect
indigenous people, has been the
most vocal.
A spokesperson with survival
says, it is clear that it
is not a viable way of life.
It is not based on choice.
It deprives people of
their meaning, their
sense of well-being.
Survival helped the
bushmen in Botswana's
courts, a proposition
that ended up winning
in 2006.
The high court ruled the bushmen
had been removed unfairly
and should be allowed to
return.
But the government decided
it would read the court
ruling very selectively.
Only bushmen who'd brought the
suit would be allowed to return.
Mosetayani Matsipane was there
for the court case and heard
the judges' ruling, and could
return.
Ten years later, he is
the leader of Motlomelo,
one of a handful of
small bushmen settlements
in the reserve.
The government says
it is working with the
villages to restore some
basic services, like
access to water.
It also wants to focus
on community-based
tourism projects.
Matsipane is happy to be out
of New Xade, but he doesn't
think the government's attitude
has changed.
He believes they still want
him out of the reserve.
"I continually get
pressure," he says.
"The government has been doing
the same thing as before.
But I would rather
they take my dead body.
I won't go back."
His wife, Hakanyaziwe, says
this is where she belongs.
"What's important to me
is the fruit of the land
in Kalahari," she says.
"In the resettlement camps,
everything is about money.
If you don't have money, people
end up stealing to survive."
Professor Maitseo Bolaane
is the director of the San
Research Center, a small office
at the University of
Botswana in Gaborone.
She believes the San people
are a resource that can be used
for the good of the Kalahari
reserve.
MAITSEO BOLAANE,
Director, San Research
Center: They have ideas.
They can contribute their
knowledge system in the
utilization of the resources.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Inside the
CKGR, those small communities
hold on, numbers dwindling every
year, living in the hope that
others will be able to return.
For now, it is only them,
dancing in the desert
under the Kalahari stars.
For the "NewsHour,"
I'm Martin Seemungal in
the Central Kalahari.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: On this
Independence Day, many Americans
will no doubt be enjoying a
beer or two.
One of the essential
ingredients in beer is yeast.
But, for 600 years, only two
species of yeast, ale yeast
and lager yeast, have been used
for traditional brewing.
But now a lab in North Carolina
may have found a third species,
and they found it in the
strangest of places,
on bees and wasps.
"NewsHour" science
producer Nsikan Akpan
and our "ScienceScope"
team reveal what the buzz
is all about.
NSIKAN AKPAN: It feels like
beer brewers will do anything
to spice up their booze.
There's pizza beer, banana
split chocolate stout, beer
with squid ink, and, of course,
Rocky Mountain oyster
stout, which is flavored
with bull testicles.
All this fuss seems silly, when
the foundation of alcohol's
flavor is plain old yeast.
Yeast, these little
microbes that take sugars
and ferment them into
alcohol, define a beer's
character.
Yet, for 10,000 years,
beers have essentially
relied on two types of
bland yeast that basically
add no flavors.
Now a lab in North Carolina
has discovered a new yeast
species that produces an array
of flavors without
added ingredients.
Where did they find it?
On bees.
The story of bumblebeer
begins at North Carolina
State University, in
the lab of Rob Dunn.
Once a tropical forest
ecologist, Dunn now explores the
jungle that surrounds us, the
one filled with
bugs and microbes.
ROB DUNN, North Carolina State
University: At some point,
my lab shifted to focusing
more on people's daily
lives, and that includes
food, and it includes
thinking about the biology
of food.
NSIKAN AKPAN: One day three
years ago, a colleague
inquired if the lab
knew of any microbes in
the environment
capable of making beer.
Dunn and company instantly
considered insect pollinators,
like bees and wasps.
Here's why.
Yeast hang out in flower
nectar, where the microbes feast
on the boatloads of sugar.
They then produce or ferment
sweet aromas, which then
attract the buzzing bugs.
ROB DUNN: We actually
think, based on some
work from colleagues in
Italy, that it's very
likely that those first beers
and breads were relying on
yeasts from insects, too.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Back then, a bug
carrying a fermenting yeast
may have fallen into some
wet grain.
And, boom, welcome
to the booze cruise.
In fact, some scientists argue
human agriculture started just
to mass produce grains to make
beer.
The more beer we drink, the
more yeast we have to grow.
ROB DUNN: Unambiguously,
the most successful organism
in the world is yeast.
And so if you think about all
of the yeasts we make everywhere
for many of the products
we make, they won.
NSIKAN AKPAN: But, today, where
would you even start looking
for a new beer-making yeast?
ANNE MADDEN, North Carolina
State University: Part of this
is science, and part of this
feels more like an art
that's hard to describe.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Meet Anne Madden,
the Dunn lab's microbe wrangler.
To search for unknown yeast,
she started by catching a
wild bee and a wild wasp.
She then transferred
every microbe from their
bodies to a petri dish.
Don't fret.
She didn't commit
mass bug-icide.
ANNE MADDEN: To make bumblebeer
and all of the different
bumblebeers that we have made
since, we have killed two bugs.
You have likely killed more
bugs on your way to a bar to get
beer than we did in the process
of making it.
NSIKAN AKPAN: A couple
days later, a forest of
microbes appear on the dish.
Then, in four steps,
Madden combines her
senses with technology.
First, she looks to separate the
yeast from bacteria or fungi.
ANNE MADDEN: It's about
understanding when something
glistens in a certain way.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Next, she picks
a handful of yeast candidates,
grows them on a new dish,
and then follows her nose.
ANNE MADDEN: You can smell
the same smell both on that
plate and in that final beer.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Her third task
is running the DNA from these
candidates through a national
database to ensure her
picks don't cause disease.
ANNE MADDEN: It's almost like
a Google search through all
other species that exist that
have been documented.
NSIKAN AKPAN: The final step
is a chemical test, because
despite the long history of
brewing, the genes and enzymes
responsible for fermentation
are largely unknown.
The survivors of this gauntlet
land with John Sheppard at N.C.
State's research brew house.
JOHN SHEPPARD, North
Carolina State University:
In traditional beers that
are lighter in character,
like the traditional
American lager, for
example, you don't want to
overwhelm your taste, and
so what the yeast does
is very important.
A lot of wild yeasts, which
are considered contamination
in a normal brewing process,
the reason why they're not
wanted is because they produce
a lot of off-flavors that are
not really desirable
in the beer.
So, to get a wild yeast
that doesn't produce these
off-flavors can be difficult.
So, we did a little testing
to see whether or not the
yeast strains would be able to
make beer, and we selected one.
It came from a wasp, because
this special yeast not only
makes ethanol, but makes acid,
and, as a result of that,
we had a natural sour beer.
NSIKAN AKPAN: The bumblebeer
yeast makes other flavors too,
like a sweet honey taste without
the addition of actual honey.
Craft sour beers often take
months or years to make.
Bumblebeer yeast can do the
same in a matter of weeks.
Local brewers have taken notice.
The first suds made with
bumblebeer yeast rolled
out earlier this year.
Until next time, I'm
Nsikan Akpan, and this
is "ScienceScope" from
the "PBS NewsHour."
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Nsikan tasted
one of those beers and said
that it was quite delicious.
You can read about how
scientists are using
this discovery to find
more beer-producing
yeasts made in the wild.
That's on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now, on this Fourth of July,
with many Americans spending at
least part of the day outside,
Kavitha Cardoza of our partner
Education Week returns with an
encore look at what students
can learn in the classroom
of the great outdoors.
It's part of our weekly
series Making the Grade.
ARACELY MONTERO, National
Park Service: Nice big circle.
Come on in.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Fourth graders
from Pennycook Elementary
School will soon see something
they have never seen before.
ARACELY MONTERO: So, welcome to
the Redwood Forest, everyone.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Even though
they live in Oakland, just 45
minutes away, most have never
been to a national park.
You might call it a
sensory experience.
ARACELY MONTERO, National Park
Service: Aaron, can you tell
us, what is another way we can
observe nature?
STUDENT: Like, with our nose?
ARACELY MONTERO: With our noses.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Ranger
Aracely Montero leads the tour.
The children approach the
first stand of redwoods.
ARACELY MONTERO: We are
now inside of the magical
forest of Muir Woods.
STUDENT: Oh, my God.
ARACELY MONTERO: Everyone,
take a good look up.
STUDENT: Whoa.
ARACELY MONTERO: We're
now standing under one
of the tallest living
things in the world.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: In
this classroom, students
use all their senses.
STUDENT: This one feels thick.
WOMAN: It feels really
thick, doesn't it?
STUDENT: It smells like salt.
WOMAN: Look up there.
Those are clusters of ladybugs.
STUDENT: It's like a
whole country of them.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Teacher Darlene
Wong says that place-based
learning, having children
learn by experiencing subjects,
rather than simply reading
about them, teaches skills
like critical thinking.
DARLENE WONG, Teacher:
Show me your evidence.
What evidence do you have
to prove what you're saying
or what you're writing here?
STUDENT: Whoa.
That's so big.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: The
National Park Service's
educational programs
serve approximately seven
million children every year.
Rangers conduct teacher
workshops, go on classroom
visits, and, perhaps
most importantly, create
curriculum for these trips
based on state standards.
This class is learning
about California habitats.
WOMAN: Ooh, look what I found.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Without these
programs, Wong says she couldn't
have brought her class to
the forest.
DARLENE WONG: In terms of
testing and what we have to
cover in terms of curriculum and
time, it's really -- it would
be really hard to justify it.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Julia Washburn
went from junior ranger...
JULIA WASHBURN, National
Park Service: It still fits.
STUDENT: It still fits.
KAVITHA CARDOZA:
... to park ranger.
Now she oversees all
educational programs for
the National Park Service.
JULIA WASHBURN: It's one
thing to read about a wetland,
for example, in a textbook.
And it's a very different
thing to be standing up to your
thighs in mud in a swamp or in
a wetland, such
as the Everglades.
It just really makes
the learning tangible
and very relevant, so
students can understand
why they're learning something,
not just what they're learning.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: The
source of the excitement?
Long-legged bugs
called water striders.
What's not as easily
seen are the challenges
facing the Park Service.
Budgets are down.
There's 10 percent fewer staff
than five years ago, and the
next generation of park visitors
is uncertain.
Using national parks
as classrooms isn't
just about learning.
It's also about growing the next
generation of park visitors.
GRACE LEE, Executive Director,
National Park Trust: If we
don't engage young people of
color right now with our parks,
then, 100 years from now,
we are very concerned that
there won't be the celebration
of the 200th anniversary of
the National Park Service.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Grace Lee
heads the National Park Trust.
They raise money for 20,000
kids to visit parks every year.
GRACE LEE: They have been
studies that have done recently
that have shown, of the almost
300 million people that have
gone to national parks in the
last couple of years each year,
that a very small percentage of
them are young people, and even
a smaller percentage of them
are children of color.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Fifty years
ago, the National Park Service
partnered with AAA and Chevrolet
to reach returning World War
II veterans and their families,
creating the generation of
park users we see today.
Aging baby boomers remain
the largest percentage
of park visitors overall.
JONATHAN JARVIS, Director,
National Park Service:
What we're feeling now
is that there's a new
generation that is more
urban, more diverse.
Maybe they are first-generation
immigrants to the United States,
first-generation citizens.
Maybe they came from a country
that didn't have public
lands or parks or a tradition
of that.
And so we are reaching the
kids and they're bringing
their parents to the parks.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Jon Jarvis,
the director of the National
Park Service, says America's
parks must tell the
country's evolving story.
JONATHAN JARVIS: Filling in
the gaps, as I would say,
in the American narrative.
We have added sites for civil
rights, like Harriet Tubman.
We added Stonewall, which
tells the story of the LGBT
civil rights movement as well.
We need to be telling that
story, so that all Americans
feel part of the patriotic and
symbolic values that
this nation embodies.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Jarvis
says they have also
embraced technology,
Webcams, online chats,
even video games.
National Park sites are
actually Pokemon GO sites?
JONATHAN JARVIS: They are.
They are.
The Pokemon GO community has
spread these little monsters
all over the National Park
Service, and we're
embracing that, because
it's getting people outside
and getting -- using
technology in a way that sort of
connects them to these places.
STUDENT: Whoa.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Here
in the Redwood Forest,
these 10-year-olds have
found something better
than Pokemon GO characters.
STUDENT: Turkeys.
STUDENT: Gobble, gobble.
JONATHAN JARVIS: The evidence
shows that when kids are exposed
to the place, they learn,
they retain, they become
more interested and more
excited about learning.
STUDENT: Whoa.
WOMAN: How do you
feel right now?
STUDENT: Being in the Redwood
Forest makes me feel happy.
STUDENT: Being in the
Redwood Forest makes
me want to meditate.
STUDENT: Being in the Redwood
Forest makes me feel short.
(LAUGHTER)
KAVITHA CARDOZA: The director
of the Park Service hopes
that using parks as classrooms
is just the beginning.
JONATHAN JARVIS: What I
wanted to do was to say
that the National Park
Service is a contributor
to American education,
both for students, but for
lifelong learning as well.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: For the "PBS
NewsHour" and Education Week,
I'm Kavitha Cardoza, reporting
from the Golden Gate National
Recreation Area in California.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Continuing
our theme of national parks,
the Channel Islands National
Park -- they're off the coast
of Southern California -- was
the site of a recent discovery
of part of a Pygmy mammoth, a
species of ancient elephant that
roamed the Earth 13,000 years
ago.
This story was produced
by students from Etiwanda
High School in Southern
California, part of
the "NewsHour"'s
Student Reporting Labs.
It's narrated by rising high
school senior Nick Hinojosa.
NICK HINOJOSA: Off the
California coast lies
Channel Islands National
Park, where archaeological
discoveries are
still being made.
Laura Kirn is the chief of
cultural resources for the
Channel Islands National Park.
LAURA KIRN, Chief of
Cultural Resources, Channel
Islands National Park:
Channel Islands national
park is world-famous
for its archaeology.
Channel Islands really represent
a part of California that
doesn't exist on the mainland
anymore.
And because we don't
have burrowing animals
here, the archaeological
record, the evidence
in the ground is intact.
And that is unheard of.
NICK HINOJOSA: The
preservation of the islands'
archaeology has made it
possible for new artifacts
to be discovered, such as a
mammoth skull excavated in
fall 2016 on Santa Rosa Island.
Monica Bugbee, a preparator and
archaeologist for the mammoth
site in South Dakota, has
begun the painstaking
process of removing the
skull from its plaster cast.
MONICA BUGBEE, Preparator:
This is kind of an
exciting discovery
because Pygmy mammoths,
even though they're really
cool, everybody likes them
because they're small, they're
neat, we actually don't
know a whole lot about them.
This guy was found by a
park service intern who
was doing a stream survey.
So, they were just doing
routine walk down a canyon,
and they happened to notice it.
NICK HINOJOSA: The intern who
discovered the skull, Peter
Larramendy, was a recent college
graduate who recognized the
tusk sticking out of the wall
could be something much more
than just a rock.
LAURA KIRN: He was
part of the excavation.
It was something that you dream
about as a child, discovering
something like a dinosaur
or something really exciting.
NICK HINOJOSA: Don Morris
is a retired archaeologist
for the National Park
Service who aided in
the excavation of
this discovery.
DON MORRIS, National
Park Service: I think
I can confidently say
this is the best skull,
Pygmy mammoth skull, that's
ever come off the island.
Certainly, it's the best
one I have ever seen.
MONICA BUGBEE: This skull
in particular, because
it looks like it might
be in the middle of
the two species, Columbian and
Pygmy, it can give us a much
better idea of how that process
actually worked.
You know, how did they
actually dwarf from
Columbians to Pygmies?
NICK HINOJOSA: Scientists used
radiocarbon dating to discover
how long ago this mammoth
was alive.
This kind of dating is done
by measuring the amount of
carbon-14 in a sample and using
its half-life to calculate
how old the sample is.
MONICA BUGBEE: There was some
charcoal that we found in the
dirt, and we radiocarbon dated
that, and it's about 15,000
years old, I believe, so this
guy's actually pretty young.
NICK HINOJOSA: Justin Wilkins,
a curator at the mammoth site,
has been working with Bugbee
to clean and prepare
the skull for display.
JUSTIN WILKINS, Curator: So
in looking at the past, we can
then access how our species
or other species handled
changes in the environment.
So, we look at the mammoths.
We look at humans.
We also look at a bunch of
small animals to see how those
animals handle these changes,
and then try to decide, predict,
based on the information and
patterns we see from these
specimens, what patterns we're
seeing in the present, how
that's going to change in the
future.
NICK HINOJOSA: Much
of archaeology still
depends on careful
observation and human work.
DON MORRIS: You have
got to move dirt.
You have got to keep your
eyes open and pay attention
to what you're observing.
LAURA KIRN: It's incredibly
exciting to think that
these things are still
out here, they're
still very fragile, and we
want to protect them and
study them in the right ways.
But it doesn't mean that people
can't still discover exciting
new things that happen to
be thousands of years
old on Santa Rosa Island.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And now to
a "NewsHour" Shares, something
that caught our eye here
that may be of interest to you.
When you think of the most
popular sports in the world,
even us Americans know that
soccer is number one worldwide.
But what about number two?
Believe it or not, it's cricket.
Now that English game
is starting to catch on
in the United States.
Tina Martin from PBS station
WGBH in Boston reports.
TINA MARTIN: Suiting up,
stretching out and getting in a
little batting practice before
a cricket match on a
remote field in Wrentham.
It's an unusual game that
most resembles baseball,
except you have a bowler
instead of pitcher,
and the ball has to
bounce before you hit it.
Games can last for hours,
even days, and scores
go into the hundreds.
NITIN MEWEDA, Player: I
am completely into it.
TINA MARTIN: Nitin
Meweda has played since
he was a boy in India.
He says American co-workers
were often confused
about his favorite sport.
NITIN MEWEDA: That's one thing
which used to happen with me
maybe five, six years ago.
And I would say -- they
would say, what did
you do this weekend?
I was like, oh,
I played cricket.
And they were like,
cricket, what is that?
TINA MARTIN: Cricket was played
in the United States back in
colonial times, but had pretty
much died out by the Civil War.
But it has thrived
in other parts of the
world, with international
matches that are among
the most watched
global sporting events.
At some games, there are
even royal photo-ops.
RAVI UPPALAPATI, Organizer:
Cricket in India is a religion.
It's more than three times
the population of the United
States, and there is one sport.
Can you imagine like, in States,
if you have one professional
sport all over the year,
how crazy it would be, right?
It is crazy.
TINA MARTIN: Most of the players
in Massachusetts are immigrants,
representing far corners of
the world.
RAVI UPPALAPATI: Most of us
are from India, but there are
a lot of people from Pakistan,
and other countries, Sri Lanka,
and Australia, and England.
TINA MARTIN: Ravi Uppalapati
is one of the organizers of
the Massachusetts State Cricket
League.
He says they now have
several thousand players.
RAVI UPPALAPATI: I think there
were 12 teams in Massachusetts
Cricket League in probably
'97.
There are more than 30-plus
teams now, so things
have picked up so much.
TINA MARTIN: The MSCL is trying
to create a new generation of
players, sponsoring clinics
and camps.
RAVI UPPALAPATI: You
see lacrosse these days.
Last two, three years,
nobody was playing lacrosse.
Kids are loving lacrosse.
So it's just a matter of
like how we introduce,
where we introduce.
TINA MARTIN: A bigger
challenge might be educating
the parents on what
they're actually watching
their kids play.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Tina Martin in
Wrentham, Massachusetts.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And an update
on North Korea before we go.
U.S. Secretary of State
Rex Tillerson confirmed
that the missile North
Korea launched today
was in fact an intercontinental
ballistic missile.
He called for stronger measures
to hold North Korea accountable.
And the U.S. military has just
confirmed that U.S. and South
Korean forces today carried
out a military exercise
to counter what they
called North Korea's
destabilizing and unlawful
actions.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: The electric guitar has
long been a symbol of American
cool.
So, why is its
popularity now declining?
We're hosting a Twitter chat
on Thursday at 1:00 p.m. to
discuss the art of the guitar
and the future of music.
Learn more on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
That's the "NewsHour"
for tonight.
I'm William Brangham.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow night.
For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and see you soon.